Build time analytics (#33555)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/build-analytics.adoc

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Build Analytics
:categories: analytics
:summary: This guide presents what build analytics is and how to configure it.

> The Quarkus team has limited knowledge, from Maven download numbers, on the excellent growth of Quarkus and the amount of users reporting issues/concerns, but we are really flying blind on which platforms, OS, java combinations, build tools etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Quarkus team has limited knowledge, from Maven download numbers, on the excellent growth of Quarkus and the amount of users reporting issues/concerns, but we are really flying blind on which platforms, OS, java combinations, build tools etc.
```
```suggestion
The Quarkus team has limited knowledge, from Maven download numbers, of the remarkable growth of Quarkus and the number of users reporting issues/concerns. Still, we need more insight into the platforms, operating system, java combinations, and build tools our users employ.
```
This suggestion:
* Uses shorter sentences.
* Avoids unfortunate terminology.
* Applies the other Vale style suggestions.

The build analytics tool aims to provide us with this information.

> == How does it work?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== How it works
```

> *Collection happens only at build-time* and not at runtime. Collection occurs during usage of Quarkus build tooling (maven, gradle). Your built application will not contain any data collection code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Collection happens only at build-time* and not at runtime. Collection occurs during usage of Quarkus build tooling (Maven, Gradle). Your built application does not contain any data collection code.
```

Reviewer: You can do it that way. It's not terribly important, but, in technical documentation, we [avoid the future tense for various reasons](https://www.google.com/search?q=avoid+future+tense+in+technical+writing&oq=avoid+future+tense+in+technical+writing&gs_lcrp=EgZjaHJvbWUyBggAEEUYOTIGCAEQRRhAMgYIAhBFGEDSAQg4NzI4ajFqN6gCALACAA&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8).

Author: Thanks @rolfedh. Will follow your guidance.

> *All data collected is anonymous*. There will be no way to link this data back to an individual or organization. The intent is to learn about general patterns and trends therefore there is no need to gather anything but anonymous data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*All data collected is anonymous*. There is no way to link this data back to an individual or organization. The intent is to learn about general patterns and trends; therefore, only anonymous data is needed.
```

*Collection is Disabled by default* You will be asked if you want to opt in to data collection the first time you use devMode. The console will wait for a few seconds for your input.

== This is the data being collected

* Anonymous application name. SHA-256 hash of the Group Id + Artifact Id.
* Anonymous application version. SHA-256 hash of the Artifact Id + Version.
* Anonymous user id. During the 1st build, this is generated locally at random, and subsequently reused.
* Quarkus version
* Java version
* GraalVM version
* Operating system details

> * Build system details (Maven, Gradle, etc)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Build system details, such as Maven, Gradle, and so on.
```

* If a CI system was detected
* Country and timezone

> * Extensions enabled. Only extensions with grouIds starting with `io.quarkus` or `io.quarkiverse` are collected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Extensions enabled. Only extensions whose `groupIds` start with `io.quarkus` or `io.quarkiverse` are collected.
```

Reviewer: s/grouIds/`groupIds`/

  },
  "event": "PROD_BUILD",
  "integrations": {},
  "messageId": "api-2PCI9LWQM8oRyHIS6fCQMIQ0dlR",
  "originalTimestamp": "2023-05-01T15:21:22.266033Z",
  "properties": {
    "app_extensions": [
      {
        "artifact_id": "quarkus-resteasy-jackson",
        "group_id": "io.quarkus",
        "version": "999-SNAPSHOT"
      },
      {
        "artifact_id": "quarkus-smallrye-openapi",
        "group_id": "io.quarkus",
        "version": "999-SNAPSHOT"
      },
      {
        "artifact_id": "quarkus-hibernate-orm",
        "group_id": "io.quarkus",
        "version": "999-SNAPSHOT"
      },
      {
        "artifact_id": "quarkus-opentelemetry",
        "group_id": "io.quarkus",
        "version": "999-SNAPSHOT"
      },
      {
        "artifact_id": "quarkus-jdbc-postgresql",
        "group_id": "io.quarkus",
        "version": "999-SNAPSHOT"
      },
      {
        "artifact_id": "quarkus-arc",
        "group_id": "io.quarkus",
        "version": "999-SNAPSHOT"
      }
    ]
  },
  "receivedAt": "2023-05-01T15:21:23.184Z",
  "timestamp": "2023-05-01T15:21:22.266Z",
  "type": "track",
  "userId": "872332b4-4b21-42ee-854b-d86c8629e78b"
}
----

== Where are the config files?

> Analytics configurations are stored at the `~/redhat` folder:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Analytics configurations are stored at the `~/.redhat` folder:
```

Reviewer 2: Will be Windows users aware what `~` means?

Reviewer 3: Maybe ...`.redhat folder in the user's home directory`?

Author: Sure. Will do.

      },
      {
        "artifact_id": "quarkus-jdbc-postgresql",
        "group_id": "io.quarkus",
        "version": "999-SNAPSHOT"
      },
      {
        "artifact_id": "quarkus-arc",
        "group_id": "io.quarkus",
        "version": "999-SNAPSHOT"
      }
    ]
  },
  "receivedAt": "2023-05-01T15:21:23.184Z",
  "timestamp": "2023-05-01T15:21:22.266Z",
  "type": "track",
  "userId": "872332b4-4b21-42ee-854b-d86c8629e78b"
}
----

== Where are the config files?
Analytics configurations are stored at the `.redhat` folder in the user's home directory:

`anonymousId` is the locally generated anonymous user id.

`com.redhat.devtools.quarkus.localconfig` holds if the user has agreed to send analytics data or not.

`com.redhat.devtools.quarkus.remoteconfig` cache of the remote configuration that allows to disable analytics globally.

== Show me the code!

The bulk of the code is implemented in the `analytics-common` module. Data is sent using calls to `io.quarkus.analytics.AnalyticsService.sendAnalytics(...)` from the Maven and Gradle plugins.

The uploaded events are stored under the project's `/target` folder with the name `build-analytics-event.json`.

> == Configuration

Reviewer 4: For some users, it might be useful to see a message about the analytics being sent in the app log. ATM, only failed events are logged, but the successfull ones are silent.
Maybe a config property could allow users to make them visible as well.
WDYT?

Author: I can add a log line in debug mode. Will that help?

Reviewer 4: Sorry, I meant build log, not app log.

My point is that either in dev mode or in pro build, analytics events are not logged rn. This is nice, as it does not clutter the log. On the other hand, someone might not like it, because the events go unnoticed.

I guess my question is if you think it is worth the effort to make it configurable.

Author: it doesn't hurt but given that we publish the sent event on /target and I just made a debug line output, I think it's enough.
We acknowledge when the analytics is activated and it's implicit that will always happen. 
Always publish an info about it might also be annoying.

Reviewer 4: Ok, it's true that there is a clear ack on activation. Let's close this topic then. Thank you.

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Build analytics
:categories: analytics
:summary: This guide presents what build analytics is and how to configure it.

> The Quarkus team has limited knowledge, from Maven download numbers, of the remarkable growth of Quarkus and the number of users reporting issues/concerns. Still, we need more insight into the platforms, operating system, java combinations, and build tools our users employ.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The Quarkus team has limited knowledge, from Maven download numbers, of the remarkable growth of Quarkus and the number of users reporting issues/concerns. Still, we need more insight into the platforms, operating system, Java combinations, and build tools our users employ.
```

Author: On a follow up PR

The build analytics tool aims to provide us with this information.

== How it works

*Collection happens only at build-time* and not at runtime. Collection occurs during usage of Quarkus build tooling (Maven, Gradle). Your built application does not contain any data collection code.

*All data collected is anonymous*. There is no way to link this data back to an individual or organization. The intent is to learn about general patterns and trends; therefore, only anonymous data is needed.

> *Collection is Disabled by default* You will be asked if you want to opt in to data collection the first time you use devMode. The console will wait for a few seconds for your input.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
*Collection is disabled by default* You will be asked if you want to opt in to data collection the first time you use dev mode. The console will wait for a few seconds for your input.
```

Author: On a follow up PR

== This is the data being collected

* Anonymous application name. SHA-256 hash of the Group Id + Artifact Id.
* Anonymous application version. SHA-256 hash of the Artifact Id + Version.
* Anonymous user id. During the 1st build, this is generated locally at random, and subsequently reused.
* Quarkus version
* Java version
* GraalVM version

> * Operating system details

Reviewer 5: I think you should list what we collect here because this can be sensitive.

Author: Will do

Author: On a follow up PR

* Build system details, such as Maven, Gradle, and so on.
* If a CI system was detected
* Country and timezone

> * Extensions enabled. Only extensions whose `groupIds` start with `io.quarkus`, `io.quarkiverse` or are included in the quarkus platform are collected.

Reviewer 5: `or`?

  },
  "event": "PROD_BUILD",
  "integrations": {},
  "messageId": "api-2PCI9LWQM8oRyHIS6fCQMIQ0dlR",
  "originalTimestamp": "2023-05-01T15:21:22.266033Z",
  "properties": {
    "app_extensions": [
      {
        "artifact_id": "quarkus-resteasy-jackson",
        "group_id": "io.quarkus",
        "version": "999-SNAPSHOT"
      },
      {
        "artifact_id": "quarkus-smallrye-openapi",
        "group_id": "io.quarkus",
        "version": "999-SNAPSHOT"
      },
      {
        "artifact_id": "quarkus-hibernate-orm",
        "group_id": "io.quarkus",
        "version": "999-SNAPSHOT"
      },
      {
        "artifact_id": "quarkus-opentelemetry",
        "group_id": "io.quarkus",
        "version": "999-SNAPSHOT"
      },
      {
        "artifact_id": "quarkus-jdbc-postgresql",
        "group_id": "io.quarkus",
        "version": "999-SNAPSHOT"
      },
      {
        "artifact_id": "quarkus-arc",
        "group_id": "io.quarkus",
        "version": "999-SNAPSHOT"
      }
    ]
  },
  "receivedAt": "2023-05-01T15:21:23.184Z",
  "timestamp": "2023-05-01T15:21:22.266Z",
  "type": "track",
  "userId": "872332b4-4b21-42ee-854b-d86c8629e78b"
}
----

== Where are the config files?

> Analytics configurations are stored at the `.redhat` folder in the user's home directory:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Analytics configurations are stored in the `.redhat` folder of the user's home directory:
```

Author: @rolfedh already reviewed that part and he was happy.
